OpenTelemetry OpenAI Zero-Code Instrumentation Example
======================================================

This is an example of how to instrument OpenAI calls with zero code changes,
using `opentelemetry-instrument`.

When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run, it exports traces and logs to an OTLP
compatible endpoint. Traces include details such as the model used and the
duration of the chat request. Logs capture the chat request and the generated
response, providing a comprehensive view of the performance and behavior of
your OpenAI requests.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:

- ``OTEL_PYTHON_LOGGING_AUTO_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=true`` configures OpenTelemetry SDK to export logs and events.
- ``OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_GENAI_CAPTURE_MESSAGE_CONTENT=span_only`` configures OpenAI instrumentation to capture prompt and completion contents on *span* attributes.
- ``OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp`` to specify exporter type.
- ``OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN=gen_ai_latest_experimental`` enables latest experimental features.

Setup
-----

Minimally, update the `.env <.env>`_ file with your ``OPENAI_API_KEY``. An
OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces and logs on
http://localhost:4317. If not, update ``OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`` as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Run
---

Run the example like this:

::

    dotenv run -- opentelemetry-instrument python main.py

You should see a poem generated by OpenAI while traces and logs export to your
configured observability tool.
