instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents/examples/zero-code/README.rst, before:

OpenTelemetry Anthropic Agents Zero-Code Instrumentation Example
=================================================================

This is an example of how to use OpenTelemetry's automatic instrumentation
(zero-code) capabilities with the Anthropic SDK.

The `opentelemetry-instrument` CLI automatically instruments your Python
application without requiring code changes. When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run
with the CLI, it exports traces and logs to an OTLP compatible endpoint.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:

- `OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_GENAI_CAPTURE_MESSAGE_CONTENT=true` configures
  Anthropic Agents instrumentation to capture prompt and completion contents on
  events.

Setup
-----

An OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces and logs on
http://localhost:4317. If not, update "OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT" as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

You will also need an Anthropic API key. Set it as an environment variable:

::

    export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

Run
---

Run the example with zero-code instrumentation like this:

::

    dotenv run -- opentelemetry-instrument python main.py

You should see a poem generated by Claude while traces and logs export to your
configured observability tool. No changes to `main.py` were required!

Learn More
----------

See the `OpenTelemetry Python automatic instrumentation docs
<https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/python/automatic/>`_ for more
information about zero-code instrumentation.

Commit message:

Enhance instrumentation for Anthropic Agents
- Added support for the `opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents` package, enabling tracing of requests made through the Claude Agent SDK.
- Updated `pyproject.toml` and `tox.ini` to include new test environments and dependencies for the Anthropic Agents instrumentation.
- Modified GitHub workflows to incorporate linting and testing for the new instrumentation.
- Improved documentation in README files and examples to reflect changes in usage and setup.
- Introduced new examples demonstrating both manual and zero-code instrumentation approaches.

This commit strengthens observability for applications utilizing Claude Agents, ensuring comprehensive tracing and logging capabilities.

instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents/examples/zero-code/README.rst, after:

OpenTelemetry Anthropic Agents Zero-Code Instrumentation Example
================================================================

This is an example of how to instrument Claude Agent SDK calls with zero
code changes, using ``opentelemetry-instrument``.

Based on the `claude-agent-sdk-python agents example
<https://github.com/anthropics/claude-agent-sdk-python/blob/main/examples/agents.py>`_,
this example defines two custom agents — a **code reviewer** and a
**documentation writer** — using ``AgentDefinition``, then runs queries
against them via the ``query()`` API. When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run with
the CLI, it exports traces and logs to an OTLP compatible endpoint. Traces
capture each agent turn, tool invocations, and the duration of the
interaction.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:

- ``OTEL_PYTHON_LOGGING_AUTO_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=true`` configures
  OpenTelemetry SDK to export logs and events.
- ``OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_GENAI_CAPTURE_MESSAGE_CONTENT=true`` configures
  Anthropic Agents instrumentation to capture prompt and completion contents
  on events.
- ``OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp`` to specify exporter type.

Setup
-----

Minimally, update the `.env <.env>`_ file with your ``ANTHROPIC_API_KEY``. An
OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces and logs on
http://localhost:4317. If not, update ``OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`` as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Run
---

Run the example with zero-code instrumentation like this:

::

    dotenv run -- opentelemetry-instrument python main.py

You should see the code reviewer and documentation writer agents respond in
the console while traces and logs export to your configured observability tool.
No changes to ``main.py`` were required!

Learn More
----------

See the `OpenTelemetry Python automatic instrumentation docs
<https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/python/automatic/>`_ for more
information about zero-code instrumentation.
