instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-langchain/examples/manual/README.rst, before:

OpenTelemetry Langchain Instrumentation Example
===============================================

This is an example of how to instrument Langchain when configuring OpenTelemetry SDK and instrumentations manually.

When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run, it exports traces to an OTLP-compatible endpoint.
Traces include details such as the span name and other attributes.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:
- :code:`OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp` to specify exporter type.
- :code:`OPENAI_API_KEY` key for accessing the OpenAI API.
- :code:`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` to specify the endpoint for exporting traces (default is http://localhost:4317).

Setup
-----

Minimally, update the `.env <.env>`_ file with your :code:`OPENAI_API_KEY`.
An OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces at http://localhost:4317.
If not, update :code:`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Run
---

Run the example like this:

::

    dotenv run -- python main.py

You should see the capital of France generated by Langchain ChatOpenAI while traces export to your configured observability tool.

Commit message:

Switched langchain llm callbacks to use genai utils handler (#3889)
* Removed telemetry from inference callbacks and added calls to genai utils apis instead.

* Fixed errors

* Fixed typecheck errors

* Fixed typecheck errors

* Fixed precommit errors

* added util dependancy

* updated invocation manager

* removed unnecessary dependancies

* fixed precommit

* fixed typecheck

* fixed precommit

* fixed test

* removed unnecessary line

* addressed comments

* fixed errors

* fixed precommit

* removed get_property_value method

* fixed format

* Make tox -e typecheck install langchain, and fixed some of the type
errors. The remaining ones seem like real issues that need to be fixed.

* Please fix reportPossiblyUnboundVariable

* fixed typecheck

* added and updated tests

* Fixed conflicts and removed unnecessary changes

* Fixed precommit

---------

Co-authored-by: aaronabbott <aaronabbott@google.com>

instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-langchain/examples/manual/README.rst, after:

OpenTelemetry Langchain Instrumentation Example
===============================================

This is an example of how to instrument Langchain when configuring OpenTelemetry SDK and instrumentations manually.

When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run, it exports traces to an OTLP-compatible endpoint.
Traces include details such as the span name and other attributes.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:
- :code:`OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp` to specify exporter type.
- :code:`OPENAI_API_KEY` key for accessing the OpenAI API.
- :code:`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` to specify the endpoint for exporting traces (default is http://localhost:4317).

Setup
-----

Minimally, update the `.env <.env>`_ file with your :code:`OPENAI_API_KEY`.
An OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces at http://localhost:4317.
If not, update :code:`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    pip install opentelemetry-instrumentation-langchain
    pip install util/opentelemetry-util-genai (once opentelemetry-util-genai package is released remove it from here and add dependency in opentelemetry-instrumentation-langchain)

Run
---

Run the example like this:

::

    dotenv run -- python main.py

You should see the capital of France generated by Langchain ChatOpenAI while traces export to your configured observability tool.
