instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents/examples/manual/README.rst, before:

OpenTelemetry Anthropic Agents Instrumentation Example
======================================================

This is an example of how to instrument Anthropic calls when configuring OpenTelemetry SDK and Instrumentations manually.

When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run, it exports traces and logs to an OTLP
compatible endpoint. Traces include details such as the model used and the
duration of the chat request. Logs capture the chat request and the generated
response, providing a comprehensive view of the performance and behavior of
your Anthropic requests.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:

- `OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_GENAI_CAPTURE_MESSAGE_CONTENT=true` configures
  Anthropic Agents instrumentation to capture prompt and completion contents on
  events.

Setup
-----

An OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces and logs on
http://localhost:4317. If not, update "OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT" as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

You will also need an Anthropic API key. Set it as an environment variable:

::

    export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

Run
---

Run the example like this:

::

    dotenv run -- python main.py

You should see a poem generated by Claude while traces and logs export to your
configured observability tool.

Commit message:

Enhance instrumentation for Anthropic Agents
- Added support for the `opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents` package, enabling tracing of requests made through the Claude Agent SDK.
- Updated `pyproject.toml` and `tox.ini` to include new test environments and dependencies for the Anthropic Agents instrumentation.
- Modified GitHub workflows to incorporate linting and testing for the new instrumentation.
- Improved documentation in README files and examples to reflect changes in usage and setup.
- Introduced new examples demonstrating both manual and zero-code instrumentation approaches.

This commit strengthens observability for applications utilizing Claude Agents, ensuring comprehensive tracing and logging capabilities.

instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-anthropic-agents/examples/manual/README.rst, after:

OpenTelemetry Anthropic Agents Instrumentation Example
======================================================

This is an example of how to instrument Claude Agent SDK calls when
configuring OpenTelemetry SDK and Instrumentations manually.

Based on the `claude-agent-sdk-python agents example
<https://github.com/anthropics/claude-agent-sdk-python/blob/main/examples/agents.py>`_,
this example defines two custom agents — a **code reviewer** and a
**documentation writer** — using ``AgentDefinition``, then runs queries
against them via the ``query()`` API. When `main.py <main.py>`_ is run, it
exports traces, logs, and metrics to an OTLP compatible endpoint. Traces
capture each agent turn, tool invocations, and the duration of the
interaction.

Note: `.env <.env>`_ file configures additional environment variables:

- ``OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_GENAI_CAPTURE_MESSAGE_CONTENT=true`` configures
  Anthropic Agents instrumentation to capture prompt and completion contents
  on events.

Setup
-----

Minimally, update the `.env <.env>`_ file with your ``ANTHROPIC_API_KEY``. An
OTLP compatible endpoint should be listening for traces and logs on
http://localhost:4317. If not, update ``OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`` as well.

Next, set up a virtual environment like this:

::

    python3 -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "python-dotenv[cli]"
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Run
---

Run the example like this:

::

    dotenv run -- python main.py

You should see the code reviewer and documentation writer agents respond in
the console while traces and logs export to your configured observability tool.
